---
layout: post
title: Minor similarities & major differences in <em>Rebecca</em> and <em>Jane Eyre</em>
published: true
---


I read _Jane Eyre_, by Charlotte Brönte, more than ten years ago, when I was still in high school. I remember not liking it very much, having a hard time sympathising with the heroine, finding the story slightly too sad and just pathetic (I recall writing an essay on how it reminded me of _Cinderella_, only a lot less glamorous). It was also way too long. Then I went on to study English at university; it turned out unattractive but bright _Jane Eyre_ was a favourite among most of my (female) peers. So witty, so strong, so self-possessed, ever so _right_ and bordering on moral perfection. On the contrary, I have always been a fan of crazy and passionate Catherine Earnshaw from _Wuthering Heights_, which could be considered as the ultimate antithesis of plain ol’ Jane. Truth be told, I never cared much for Jane, and not even when the novel turned out to be of compulsory reading on one of my courses did I attempt to re-reading it in its entirety. I just couldn’t be bothered.

Still, I _have_ watched BBC’s film adaptation more times than I’d care to admit. I honestly have no idea how that happened; it was a recurrent show on Spanish TV, and they always had it on at times when I just had nothing else to do. So I know the story by heart, all of it. Jane Eyre, her evil aunt, the friend that dies when she’s at the orphanage (no cheating, her name was Helen). Then there’s Mr Rochester, Blanche (his soon-to-be fiance, or so we believe), Adele, who is Mr Rochester’s protegé and the reason he needs Jane in the first place. Yes, I swear I remembered all of these names - that’s what I use my precious memory capacity for.

Reading _Rebecca_,by Daphne du Maurier, however, was my choice. And of course, I didn’t know at the time of picking it up that the book had been inspired by _Jane Eyre_. Don’t get me wrong - I would have read it regardless. As I kept reading, I also kept seeing all those similarities, from the plain heroine to the dark, mysterious and tormented hero. Mr Rochester and Mr de Winter, both much older men who have already been married once and who are way more experienced and wealthy than the young female protagonist. The strange, knowledgeable housekeeper, which in _Jane Eyre_ was a friend to count on, and in _Rebecca_ comes across as a constant threat and source of misery. The former wife, who in _Jane Eyre_ is represented by lunatic Bertha and in _Rebecca_ takes the shape of Rebecca, a beautiful woman who died during a sailing trip. And, finally, the dark mansion, Thornfield Manor and Manderley respective, both grand and scary, both beautiful and wild and full of secrets. Once I finished reading the novel, I went online for answers - I wasn’t disappointed.

>"The young heroine is like Jane Eyre in being an orphan, humble, shy and diffident, and her occupation, as companion to a rich lady, is similar in status to that of a Victorian governess. Max De Winter is like Rochester in being rich and independent, the owner of a country house, and in having an unhappy secret which makes him moody and inward looking. The two secrets are similar (first wives who were brilliant but immoral), and both have attempted to rid themselves of their wives by illegal means. In both cases, the country house becomes oppressive to its owner because of its association with the mad, bad wife. In spite of being haunted and oppressed, however, by the houses which contain evidence of disastrous first marriages, both Rochester and Max De Winter try to establish new, young wives in the same houses and under the same domestic rules” (Stoneman 99)

To be honest, I’m just glad I wasn’t imagining things here; the two novels are similar in many ways, _Rebecca_ obviously parallelling _Jane Eyre_. You can read several essays on the matter, from Bernadette Bertrandias’s _Daphne Du Maurier’s Transformation of Jane Eyre in Rebecca_ to John Seelye’s _Jane Eyre's American Daughters: From the Wide, Wide, World to Anne of Green Gables a Study of Marginalized Maidens and What They Mean_ and _Echoes in Gothic Romance: Stylistic Similarities Between Jane Eyre and Rebecca_, by Stephanie S. Haddad. All of them enlightening, and all of them touching upon the similarities between the two texts. 

>“I am glad it cannot happen twice, the fever of first love. For it is a fever, and a burden, too, whatever the poets may say.” - _Rebecca_ 

I am, however, going to focus on the _differences_ and, because this is ultimately a review on my last read - _Rebecca_ -, I am going to stand, for the first time, tall and proud of dear, plain Jane, and speak up, for the first time, on her behalf. To be blunt, Jane Eyre just makes a much stronger, compelling and admirable heroine. And if I’m allowed to be even more blunt, the nameless female character - and protagonist! - in _Rebecca_ has to be one of the blandest and most stupid female characters I’ve ever read about. She’s so insecure and jealous of a dead woman who apparently was more beautiful, intelligent and skilled than her, that she spends all her time wondering what she was like and whether her husband will ever be able to love her. I mean, you’re poor, inexperienced, not that pretty and lack a sense of style - why on Earth would anyone marry you other than because they loved _you_? But our protagonist is not as intelligent or as perceptive as her dead competitor, so she can’t think that deep - instead, she stays on the surface and analyses all events with the level of perceptiveness of a five year-old child. It’s not necessarily a bad thing if it’s done on purpose; I suspect this was the case here.

As I hope you know by know (hint: spoiler alert), he who bears the name of Maxim de Winter killed his first wife, Rebecca, on the premise that _she_ was a crazy mad woman displaying immoral behaviour, sleeping around with other men and, it is subtly suggested, with her personal maid. Hehe. But of course, Maxim! You freaking _killed_ your wife and hid her in a sinking boat, but _she_ was the immoral one. God, I love that. But the madness doesn’t end here. What would you do if your newlywed husband confessed to killing his former wife? 

>“Will you look into my eyes and tell me that you love me now?” - _Rebecca_

Well, if it were me, I’d freak out to no end and run away. But our nameless female protagonist, from now on Mrs de Winter, takes pleasure in learning the truth and discovering that Rebecca was not that great after all - plus, Maxim never actually loved her! So instead of fleeing or at least questioning her husband and, well, considering whether his was a good move, she stands by his side and tries to find a way out when the dead body is discovered inside a sunken boat near Manderley’s shore. Concerned that the police may find out, Mrs de Winter hopes and prays for a lucky turn of events - and it happens. 

And it is at this point that _Jane Eyre_ and _Rebecca_ couldn’t take two more different roads. While Mrs de Winter doesn’t judge her husband’s behaviour at all, Jane is at first distressed when she discovers that Rochester is still married to a woman who not only is not dead, but he’s been hiding inside the house all along. Agitated and outraged, Jane _does_ run away from Thornfield, unable to live under the same roof as Rochester and his lunatic (and very much alive) wife. Jane then goes through a process of learning and self-acceptance by which, at the end of the novel, she gains both emotional and financial independence (the first one she’s worked for, the second one is a metaphorical reward). She can then go back to Rochester, who has finally fallen and been punished, and claim her spot next to him - this time as his equal in every way -, thus escaping patriarchy and dismantling the status quo of her time.

>“Either you go to America with Mrs. Van Hopper or you come home to Manderley with me."
"Do you mean you want a secretary or something?"
"No, I'm asking you to marry me, you little fool.” - _Rebecca_

It is different for Mrs de Winter, of course - the poor creature seems to have no choice. She _does_ have a choice, however; she just can’t face the idea of having to care for herself. Mrs de Winter - whose identity is directly linked to her husband, even in regards to her own name - will always be under the influence of Maxim de Winter, as being his wife is the only role she’s ever considered for herself. In fact, Mrs de Winter has always had an owner - previously represented by Mrs van Hopper - whereas Jane ends _her_ story by owning herself and her own life.

>“I am no bird; and no net ensnares me: I am a free human being with an independent will.” - _Jane Eyre_

From beginning to end, the plot in _Rebecca_ suggests the novel was inspired by _Jane Eyre_. However, the way in which both texts transcend differs greatly. By the end of its very long plot, _Jane Eyre_ proposes a female character that has evolved, come to herself, understood her uniqueness and brilliance and learned to love herself. Jane doesn’t need Mr Rochester _at all_. Not even on an emotional level, not even to fill the void of loneliness. Yet Jane chooses to go back to him, this time as an equal, even as a superior to Mr Rochester, who is now a cripple living in a halfway burned big house. 

>“But I have had enough melodrama in this life, and would willingly give my five senses if they could ensure us our present peace and security. Happiness is not a possession to be prized, it is a quality of thought, a state of mind. Of course we have our moments of depression; but there are other moments too, when time, unmeasured by the clock, runs on into eternity and, catching his smile, I know we are together, we march in unison, no flash of thought or opinion makes a barrier between us.” - _Rebecca_

Mrs de Winter in _Rebecca_, however, stays with Maxim because she’s comfortable and has nowhere else to go. In fact, at some point she considers sharing a roof with him but living independent lives; sure, she loves him, but as long as she can stay in the house and no one knows they don’t get along well, she can handle a failed marriage. What she can’t handle is being on her own and not having a house. 

>"I do not think, sir, you have any right to command me, merely because you are older than I, or because you have seen more of the world than I have; your claim to superiority depends on the use you have made of your time and experience.” - _Jane Eyre_ 

I realised, while searching for quotes from _Jane Eyre_, that I haven’t been fair to the XIXth century classic. In fact, I found most of the quotes from that novel purely brilliant. While _Rebecca_ is just as well written, featuring some really beautiful paragraphs - especially when it comes to descriptions of nature -, the characters are just not that great. Both Maxim and Mrs de Winter are pretty flat and don’t evolve throughout the story (and I don’t care that Mrs de Winter _thinks_ she has evolved; she hasn’t). As for Rebecca, she just follows the stereotype of a psycho woman, and was probably a source of inspiration for _Gone Girl_.  

From reading _Rebecca_ I learned that I can enjoy a good story but can be disappointed when there’s too much hype around a novel that is really not that great - even if well-plotted. From quoting _Jane Eyre_ and remembering the book I realised I _must_ just read it again. Now, _that_’s a transcendent book. 
