

Published two weeks after his seventieth birthday, _Ada, or Ardor_ is one of Nabokov's greatest masterpieces, the glorious culmination of his career as a novelist. It tells a love story troubled by incest. But more: it is also at once a fairy tale, epic, philosophical treatise on the nature of time, parody of the history of the novel, and erotic catalogue. _Ada, or Ardor_ is no less than the supreme work of an imagination at white heat (from Goodreads).

Attempting to read and finish _Ada or Ardor_ was one thing. Attempting to actually review the book, that’s something quite else.

>“Was she really beautiful? Was she at least what they call attractive? She was exasperation, she was torture.” 

Exactly, dear Vladimir, dear readers: this is how I felt while reading _Ada_. Was it really beautiful? Was it at least attractive? Was it pleasurable? Or, rather, a torture? Like all complex things in life, it was both.  

I don’t even know how to tackle this review. It’s such a massive novel (and I’m not talking about length, although it is lengthy as well).

I’ll start from the beginning: in the beginning, I was seventeen and an ignorant. Then I picked up _Lolita_, just because the cover looked nice, and I fell in love with Literature, and that was it. I was doomed, and I was blessed. As I said, all complex things are complex in several ways. Anyway, I picked up _Lolita_, and then I picked up several minor works by the Russian-American author, and eventually I decided I would purchase _Ada o el ardor_. The fact that I bought the first copy in Spanish should give me an idea of how long I’ve been postponing this for. Because I haven’t bought a translated novel from the English since my second year at Uni, I’d say I’ve had _Ada_ on my shelves for seven years. Ouch. Yes, it had to be done. I did get an English copy, though, because I`m weird like that. Have I mentioned that I’ve been reading this novel in two languages –depending on my mood?

And here’s why I’ve waited more than seven years to do this: I haven’t. I probably tried reading it right on the day I got it; I just couldn’t manage to get past the third page. I mean... granoblastically?

>“All happy families are more or less dissimilar; all unhappy ones are more or less alike," says a great Russian writer in the beginning of a famous novel (Anna Arkadievitch Karenina, transfigured into English by R.G. Stonelower, Mount Tabor Ltd., 1880). That pronouncement has little if any relation to the story to be unfolded now, a family chronicle, the first part of which is, perhaps, closer to another Tolstoy work, Detstvo i Otrochestvo (Childhood and Fatherland, Pontius Press, 1858). Van's maternal grandmother Daria ("Dolly") Durmanov was the daughter of Prince Peter Zemski, Governor of Bras d'Or, an American province in the Northeast of our great and variegated country, who had married, in 1824, Mary O'Reilly, an Irish woman of fashion. Dolly, an only child, born in Bras, married in 1840, at the tender and wayward age of fifteen, General Ivan Durmanov, Commander of Yukon Fortress and peaceful country gentleman, with lands in the Severn Tories (Severnïya Territorii), that tesselated protectorate still lovingly called "Russian" Estoty, which commingles, granoblastically and organically, with "Russian" Canady, otherwise "French" Estoty, where not only French, but Macedonian and Bavarian settlers enjoy a halcyon climate under our Stars and Stripes.”

I wish I could tell you that it gets easier, but it doesn’t. You do get used to it though. Eventually it just flows. With books like this one, you just have to let go of everything, dive in and enjoy the ride.

A major difference between _Lolita_ and _Ada or ardor_ is the amount of things that happen in them. _Lolita_ is a rather plot-driven novel. Sure, there´s also the amazing language and the complexity of its characters, but stuff happens. An account of the main events in _Lolita _might take you several lines. _Ada or ardor_, however, is a rather plot-less book. Not much goes on in it. Van and Ada meet, they start having the strange relationship the whole novel revolves around, and then they keep staying apart and meeting again for the rest of the story. With _Lolita_ having such a powerful and controlled climax (or, actually, two climaxes),  _Ada or ardor_ feels a little bit erratic. One knows very well what the novel is about; you just don’t really find much is happening, save for the two main characters finding, missing, loving or hating each other, and a couple of secondary characters dying here and there. And yet, one of the main themes in _Ada_ is time, and time does progress within the novel –although there is a major time-jump by the end. While the story is told mainly in a chronological order, there is a lot of flashbacking, as well as several references to future events.   

If on a narrative level _Ada_ did not offer me much, it is because of its brilliant narration that I kept reading it –that, and that I love a challenge. Dr. Ivan (Van) Veen, psychologist, professor of philosophy and student of time, is the protagonist and author of his own story, and, by writing a memoir, he gives an account of it through a third person narrator. Writing as a very old man, Van tells his own life/love story with his cousin/sister Ada, and discusses everything that happens in it from the perspective of someone who already knows how the story is going to end. While Van’s is a singular voice, probably similar to Humbert Humbert’s on both a linguistic and tormented level, third person narrators can only be so special to the avid reader. We’ve met them all. Or have we? One of the many quirks of _Ada_ is Ada’s narrative incursions via a fictional editing process. Such additions appear between brackets, as if the character had grabbed a pencil and made notes on the margins, which would have then been included as footnotes. Van and Ada, wise and old, sit down together and revise their own story while she, fastidious and temperamental as ever, makes her own remarks, and he accepts them and admires her for it. A love story can hardly get any more beautiful than this. Just as brilliant are Van`s own incursions as a first person narrator which I, personally, read as his incapability to detach himself from certain moments in the story.

>“The fire you rubbed left its brand on the most vulnerable, most vicious and tender point of my body. Now I have to pay for your rasping the red rash too strongly, too soon, as charred wood has to pay for burning. When I remain without your caresses, I lose all control of my nerves, nothing exists any more than the ecstasy of friction, the abiding effect of your sting, of your delicious poison.”

Reading _Lolita_ at seventeen was challenging because, as it turned out, I didn’t know as many words as I probably should have –and thought I did. However, and having re-read it a couple of years ago, I must say _Lolita_ is relatively easy to understand, provided you are a competent reader. _Ada or ardor_’s language, on the other hand, can be daunting. Word-games, double and triple meanings, words in Russian and French –not always accompanied by a translation−. Even in their theoretically spontaneous and unprepared conversations, Van and Ada stick to their love for words and sensual commentary and, read out loud, some paragraphs could make a reader both blush and climax –metaphorically speaking, of course. It is that good. Some sentences are just sublime.

>“Children of her type contrive the purest philosophies. Ada had worked out her own little system. Hardly a week had elapsed since Van’s arrival when he was found worthy of being initiated in her web of wisdom. An individual’s life consisted of certain classified things: "real things" which were unfrequent and priceless, simply "things" which formed the routine stuff of life; and "ghost things," also called "fogs," such as fever, toothache, dreadful disappointments, and death. Three or more things occurring at the same time formed a "tower," or, if they came in immediate succession, they made a "bridge." "Real towers" and "real bridges" were the joys of life, and when the towers came in a series, one experienced supreme rapture; it almost never happened, though. In some circumstances, in a certain light, a neutral "thing" might look or even actually become "real" or else, conversely, it might coagulate into a fetid "fog." When the joy and the joyless happened to be intermixed, simultaneously or along the ramp of duration, one was confronted with "ruined towers" and "broken bridges.”

And finally, there’s the side of _Ada or ardor_ –and most of Nabokov novels− that really fascinates me. I have a love-hate relationship with the way in which Nabokov portrays his female characters, and how he not only takes their voices away, but actually abandons them in the arms of the men who have loved and loathed them, tormented male characters who can tell anything –but the actual, objective truth. Both Lolita and Ada are described as strong, powerful, temperamental, perverse, manipulating and doubtful characters, yet they are, in fact, vulnerable, young and voiceless young women. What saves Ada –and Van− from my critical, feminist approach, is the ending: Ada seems to be happily enjoying her life with Van, on her own will and at her own risk. Lolita, however, is only given a voice in one of the last passages of the novel. No, I'd almost rather go back with Q. As Humbert Humbert wisely points out, Quilty broke her heart, but he has ruined her life. I admire Nabokov’s ability to make you sympathise with monsters, or with characters that make debatable choices, and almost stick with them no matter what. Creating a likeable character whom readers will like is a valuable but relatively easy accomplishment. Creating a horrible character whom readers will sympathise with –as opposed to just being fascinated by him (or her) −, that’s the work of a genius.

>“...for the human brain can become the best torture house of all those it has invented, established and used in a millions of years, in millions of lands, on millions of howling creatures.”

Did I like _Ada or ardor _more than I liked _Lolita_? No, I didn’t. Did I at least enjoy _Ada or ardor_ at all? I did enjoy it, but I believe the pay-off was insufficient. I struggled for the most part of it, and I’m very, very glad it’s over. I’m pretty sure I will not re-read this one, and that’s a sad fact. But even though it’s breathtakingly well-written –and I know I will never read a more beautiful and pathetic account of a fictional suicide−, and even though it’s complex, and rich, and just great, it doesn’t make up for the amount of time I’ve spent –wasted− trying to figure out what was going on, or the moments I’ve considered just throwing it out the window –but then my room is on the ground level, so no damage would have been done.

>“In the fatal course of the most painful ailments, sometimes […], sometimes there occur sweet mornings of perfect repose- and that not owning to some blessed pill or potion […] or at least without our knowing that the loving hand of despair slipped us the drug.”
